Leading Edge
Perspective
How to build the virtual cell with artiﬁcial
intelligence: Priorities and opportunities
Charlotte Bunne,1,2,3,4,50 Yusuf Roohani,1,3,5,50 Yanay Rosen,1,3,50 Ankit Gupta,3,6 Xikun Zhang,1,3,7 Marcel Roed,1,3
Theo Alexandrov,8,9 Mohammed AlQuraishi,9 Patricia Brennan,3 Daniel B. Burkhardt, 11 Andrea Califano,10,12,13
(Author list continued on next page)
SUMMARY
Cells are essential to understanding health and disease, yet traditional models fall short of modeling and
simulating their function and behavior. Advances in AI and omics offer groundbreaking opportunities to
create an AI virtual cell (AIVC), a multi-scale, multi-modal large-neural-network-based model that can repre-
sent and simulate the behavior of molecules, cells, and tissues across diverse states. This Perspective pro-
vides a vision on their design and how collaborative efforts to build AIVCs will transform biological research
by allowing high-ﬁdelity simulations, accelerating discoveries, and guiding experimental studies, offering
new opportunities for understanding cellular functions and fostering interdisciplinary collaborations in
open science.
INTRODUCTION
The cell, the fundamental unit of life, is a wondrously intricate en-
tity with properties and behaviors that challenge the limits of
physical and computational modeling. Every cell is a dynamic
and adaptive system in which complex behavior emerges from
a myriad of molecular interactions. Some aspects are remark-
ably robust to perturbations, such as the elimination of genes
or their replacement with homologs from different species. Other
aspects are sensitive to even seemingly minor disruptions, such
1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
2Genentech, South San Francisco, CA, USA
3Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, Redwood City, CA, USA
4School of Computer and Communication Sciences and School of Life Sciences, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
5Arc Institute, Palo Alto, CA, USA
6Department of Protein Science, Science for Life Laboratory, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
7Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
8Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
9Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, USA
10Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
11Cellarity, Somerville, MA, USA
12Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA
13Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, New York, NY, USA
14Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
15Department of Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
16Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA
17Chan Zuckerberg Institute for Advanced Biological Imaging, Redwood City, CA, USA
18Department of Bioengineering, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
19Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA
20Center for Computational Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA
21Google Research, Mountain View, CA, USA
22NewLimit, San Francisco, CA, USA
23Schmidt Futures, New York, NY, USA
24Calico Life Sciences LLC, San Francisco, CA, USA
25Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, Chicago, IL, USA
26Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
27Cell Biology and Biophysics Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany
28Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
29Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
30Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA
(Afﬁliations continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 ª 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. 7045
This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

as a point mutation or an external factor that tips cells into
dysfunction and disease.
To understand a cell’s function, scientists have attempted to
construct virtual cell models to simulate, predict, and steer cell
behavior.1–6 Building on this vision, we use the term virtual cell
to deﬁne a computational model that simulates the biological
functions and interactions of a cell. Existing cell models are often
rule-based and combine assumptions about the underlying bio-
logical mechanisms with parameters ﬁt from observational data.
They generally rely on explicitly deﬁned mathematical or compu-
tational approaches, such as differential equations,
7–9 stochas-
tic simulations, 10,11 or agent-based models. 12,13 They vary in
complexity and cover different deﬁned aspects of cell biology,
such as transcription and translation, 14 cytoskeletal driven cell
behavior,15,16 biochemical networks, 17 or metabolic ﬂux. 18,19
The ﬁrst whole-cell model was developed in 2012, representing
all 482 genes and molecular functions known for an organism:
the bacteria Mycobacterium genitalium .8 Since this pioneering
work, genome-wide models have been developed to represent
other bacterial organisms, including Escherichia coli.8,20–22
Despite their widespread use in modeling biological systems,
approaches to date fall short of capturing many aspects of the
operations of both bacterial and more complex systems, such
as human cells. Challenges include: (1) Multi-scale modeling:
cells operate on multiple scales across both time and space,
from atomic to molecular to cellular and histological, with func-
tional properties emerging through nonlinear transformation
from one scale to another. (2) Diverse processes with massive
numbers of interacting components: cellular function encom-
passes numerous interacting processes, such as gene regula-
tion, metabolic pathways, and signal transduction. Each process
involves a multitude of biomolecular species, in diverse and dy-
namic conﬁgurations and states. (3) Nonlinear dynamics: most
cellular processes are highly nonlinear, such that small changes
in inputs can lead to complex changes in outputs. Thus, despite
progress in modeling speciﬁc cellular processes, these factors
collectively pose a substantial roadblock to the construction of
a virtual cell.
Two exciting revolutions in science and technology—in AI and
in omics—now enable the construction of cell models learned
directly from data. These parallel revolutions provide an unprec-
edented opportunity for an ambitious vision of an AI virtual cell
(AIVC), a multi-scale, multi-modal, large-neural-network-based
model that can represent and simulate the behavior of mole-
cules, cells and tissues across diverse states ( Figure 1).
Experimentally, the exponential increase in the throughput of
measurement technologies has led to the collection of large
and growing reference datasets within and across different cell
and tissue systems,
23–25 with data doubling every 6 months for
the past several years, 26 along with the ability to couple these
measurements with systematic perturbations. 27–29
Computationally, concurrent advances in AI have enhanced
our ability to learn patterns and processes directly from data
without needing explicit rules or human annotation. 30,31 Such
modeling paradigms have been used successfully in the biomol-
ecular realm, for example, to predict three-dimensional (3D) mo-
lecular structures from sequences
32–34 and interactions between
different molecular components.35–38 Recent modeling method-
ologies in AI provide representation and inference tools that
satisfy the trifecta of being predictive, generative, and queryable,
Jonah Cool,3 Abby F. Dernburg, 14 Kirsty Ewing,3 Emily B. Fox, 1,15,16 Matthias Haury,17 Amy E. Herr, 16,18 Eric Horvitz,19
Patrick D. Hsu, 5,18,20 Viren Jain,21 Gregory R. Johnson, 22 Thomas Kalil,23 David R. Kelley, 24 Shana O. Kelley, 25,26
Anna Kreshuk,27 Tim Mitchison,28 Stephani Otte,17 Jay Shendure,29,30,31,32 Nicholas J. Sofroniew, 33 Fabian Theis,34,35,36
Christina V. Theodoris, 37,38 Srigokul Upadhyayula,14,16,39 Marc Valer,3 Bo Wang,40,41 Eric Xing,42,43
Serena Yeung-Levy,1,44 Marinka Zitnik,45,46,47 Theofanis Karaletsos,3,* Aviv Regev,2,* Emma Lundberg,3,6,7,48,*
Jure Leskovec,1,3,* and Stephen R. Quake 3,7,49,*
31Seattle Hub for Synthetic Biology, Seattle, WA, USA
32Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, USA
33EvolutionaryScale, PBC, New York, NY, USA
34Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany
35School of Computing, Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
36TUM School of Life Sciences Weihenstephan, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
37Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Gladstone Institute of Data Science and Biotechnology, San Francisco, CA, USA
38Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA
39Molecular Biophysics and Integrated Bioimaging Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, USA
40Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
41Vector Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada
42Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
43Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
44Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
45Department of Biomedical Informatics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
46Kempner Institute for the Study of Natural and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA
47Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA
48Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
49Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
50These authors contributed equally
*Correspondence: tkaraletsos@chanzuckerberg.com (T.K.), regev.aviv@gene.com (A.R.), emmalu@stanford.edu (E.L.), jure@cs.stanford.edu
(J.L.), steve@czbiohub.org (S.R.Q.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.11.015
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7046 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

which are key utilities for advancing biological research and un-
derstanding. By building on these properties, we argue that we
now have the methods to develop a fully data-driven neural
network-based representation of an AIVC that can accelerate
research in biomedicine by enabling fast-paced in silico studies,
as well as powerful bridges between computational methods
and conﬁrmatory wet-lab experimentation ( Figure 1).
The creation of an AIVC will enable a new era of high-ﬁdelity
simulation in biology, in which cancer biologists model how spe-
ciﬁc mutations transition cells from healthy to malignant; devel-
opmental biologists forecast how developmental lineages evolve
in response to perturbations in speciﬁc progenitor cells; and mi-
crobiologists predict the effects of viral infection on not just the
infected cell but also its host organism. AIVCs will empower ex-
perimentalists and theorists alike, by transforming the means by
which hypotheses are generated and prioritized and allowing bi-
ologists to span a dramatically expanded scope, better ﬁtting the
enormous scales of biology. Although the cellular models may
not always directly identify mechanistic relationships, they can
be viewed as tools for effectively narrowing the search space
for mechanistic hypotheses, thereby accelerating the discovery
of underlying factors behind cellular function.
Figure 1. Capabilities of the AIVC
(A) The AIVC provides a universal representation (UR) of a cell state that can be obtained across species and conditions and generated from different d ata
modalities across scales (molecular, cellular, and multicellular).
(B) The AIVC possesses capabilities to represent and predict cell biology. This universality allows the representation to act as a reference that can generalize to
previously unobserved cell states, providing guidance for future data generation. Because the representation is shared across modalities, it also remains invariant
to the speciﬁc data type used to generate it, serving as a virtual representation for uniﬁed analysis across modalities. The AIVC also allows modeling the dynamics
of cells as they transition between different states, whether naturally due to processes such as differentiation or due to genetic variation or artiﬁ cially through
engineered perturbations. Thus, the AIVC enables in silico experimentation that would otherwise be cost-prohibitive or impossible in a lab.
(C) The utility of the AIVC depends on its interactions with humans at different levels. At the individual scientist level, it must be accessible throu gh open licenses
and the democratization of computing resources. Interpretability can be established through intermediary layers, such as language models that all ow the virtual
cell to communicate its results effectively. At the scientiﬁc community level, evaluating the AIVC should focus on core capabilities that move beyon d narrow
benchmarks. Community development will be crucial for ongoing improvements to the virtual cell that remain accessible. At the societal level, the AI VC must
ensure the privacy of its contents to protect sensitive data.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7047
Perspective

This perspective article is based on extensive community
discussions, including a workshop hosted by the Chan Zuck-
erberg Initiative, and aims to i gnite the formation of a collab-
orative research agenda for a lar ge-scale, long-term initiative
with a roadmap for developing, implementing, and deploying
AIVCs. We describe a vision catalyzed by emerging advances
in AI in cell biology and their application to constructing virtual
representations of cells. We lay out priorities and opportu-
nities across data generation, AI models, benchmarking, inter-
pretation, and ensuring biological veracity and safety ( Box 1 ).
Box 1. Grand challenges for building the AIVC
OUTLINING CAPABILITIES AND DESIGNING EVALUATION FRAMEWORKS
The burgeoning number of foundation models in biology perform a subset of the capabilities of virtual cells outlined in this perspective. Given the
diversity of these approaches, it is important to deﬁne what the core capabilities of AIVCs should be and how those capabilities can be evaluated. For
every capability, proper metrics must be designed, and comprehensive evaluation data be collected. Models’ capabilities should be assessed on
general performance as well as on their ability to answer speciﬁc biological questions. It is imperative to continuously improve benchmarking stra-
tegies along with AIVC models and ensure that they align with biologically meaningful objectives. As the ﬁeld develops better alignment on these
questions, collaborative opportunities will arise, and the speed at which virtual cells can be generated will accelerate.
ESTABLISHING SELF-CONSISTENCY ACROSS VARYING CONTEXTS WITH DIFFERENT ARCHITECTURES
Biology is tremendously complex: it operates across different scales, in different contexts, and is measured with different modalities. AIVC model s
must be self-consistent across all of these axes. Models should propagate function across physical scales—interactions between molecules should
have consistent effects when measuring binding afﬁnity, gene expression, cell-cell communication, or tissue organization. As physical and dynami c
scales increase in scope and size, additional context, for example, species, cell type, tissue, disease status, etc., should ﬁne-tune predictions m ade
at smaller resolutions, while also accounting for stochasticity. Model predictions should also be agnostic to their input and output modalities. Th e
same entity, proﬁled with different technologies, should have the same internal representation in an AIVC. To properly model such complex behav-
iors, many machine learning approaches should be explored and their merits carefully judged.
BALANCING INTERPRETABILITY AND BIOLOGICAL UTILITY
A consistent trend in the application of deep learning methods to biology, accelerated by the rise of large foundation models, has been the implicit
trade-off between models’ performance gains and their increasingly uninterpretable ‘‘black box’’ natures. AIVC models will ultimately be judged on
their ability to expand our understanding of biology, either by providing novel insights to biological processes or by accelerating the scientiﬁc pr o-
cess. To achieve this goal, AIVC models must make highly accurate and well-calibrated predictions that simulate biology, and the trade-off between
actionability and interpretability will have to be balanced. Actionable model outputs are those of high utility to design affordable and efﬁcient va li-
dation experiments and are key for initial real-world use. Various approaches exist for explaining model predictions, including causal modeling,
sparse featurization, and counterfactual reasoning, and this is a highly active research area. Building intuitive interfaces that facilitate the s tudy
and interpretation of AIVCs via other models, such as AI research agents, will further increase downstream utility.
CONSTRUCTING A FRAMEWORK FOR COLLABORATIVE CELL MODELING
The successful development of AIVCs will require collaboration across disciplines. We foresee a future where AIVC platforms function as open, in-
terconnected hubs for collaborative development and broad deployment of cell models to researchers and as education hubs delivering training to
researchers, as well as providing engagement activities for educators, patients, and the public. Thus, investments in infrastructure fostering op en
and collaborative development of AIVCs should be of high priority.
ENSURING AIVCs BENEFIT ALL AND PROMOTE ETHICAL AND RESPONSIBLE USE
Generating large open datasets that reﬂect human diversity—datasets integral for training AIVC models—poses a substantial challenge. Developers
will have to use the utmost care to ensure these datasets are used ethically and transparently while building AIVCs and develop strategies to mitigate
risks of model contamination with falsiﬁed data. Early adopters of AIVCs will have a key role in promoting and demonstrating responsible use of these
models. Furthermore, the development of chat-based interfaces could be crucial in democratizing access to AIVCs. Close collaboration with ethics
and regulatory experts from the outset is paramount for establishing new regulatory norms that will facilitate the responsible use of AIVCs.
UNDERSTANDING THE VALUE OF DIFFERENT DATA TYPES TO PRIORITIZE LARGE-SCALE DATA GENERATION
A fundamental question for the collaborative development of AIVCs is which data and modalities should be collected to enable generalization across
biological contexts and scales. These data will need to encompass the breadth of biology in different species, domains, and modalities, representing
the heterogeneity of life, while maintaining depth sufﬁcient to distinguish true signals from noise. A key aspect of data generation will be the simul -
taneous measurement of temporal and physical scales, while also allowing perturbations of the system.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7048 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

Box 2. Vignettes
CELL ENGINEERING TO ENABLE PHENOTYPIC DRUG DISCOVERY AND CELL-BASED THERAPEUTICS
One challenge in developing successful therapies is the difﬁculty in incorporating the full underlying genetic, molecular and cellular basis of dis -
ease during drug discovery and development. 129 These context-speciﬁc underpinnings are not fully speciﬁed and often vary between human pa-
tients and model systems used in pre-clinical studies. By integrating biological data from various sources relevant to speciﬁc disease contexts, th e
AIVC could generate an environment for testing different therapeutic interventions in silico and identify approaches for engineering cells to reverse
disease phenotypes, while accounting for the effects of varying both treatments and patient proﬁles. By representing the overall disease phenotype
speciﬁc to patient populations (rather than one speciﬁc biochemical target at a time), the AIVC can enable virtual phenotypic screens. Although in
silico experiments may not always be fully accurate, by prioritizing virtual hits with higher chances of success, the AIVC can lower experimentation
costs and accelerate the process.
The AIVC has potential to push the cell therapy frontier. With growing evidence afﬁrming the efﬁcacy and safety of cell-based therapies for rare
diseases and cancer,
130,131 the AIVC can improve systematization and precision to cell engineering. For example, virtual cell-based engineering
could enable targeted modiﬁcations to pancreatic beta cells to create individualized beta cell replacement therapies for type 1 diabetes. By simu-
lating the biological phenotype of individual patients, in silico experiments within the AIVC could identify interventions that help drive the differen-
tiation of beta cells from progenitors, cloak them from the immune system, and maintain their function, with the ultimate goal of either transplantin g
these engineered cells into patients or engineering them in situ.
UNLOCKING THE POWER OF SPATIAL BIOLOGY TO FIGHT CANCER
Spatial structures in cancer, speciﬁcally within the tumor microenvironment (TME), are critical drivers of cancer progression and can drive
resistance to the immune system and limit drug efﬁcacy. 132 Malignant cells within a tumor can engage in active immune evasion by either block-
ing immune inﬁltration, 133 evading immune recognition, or dampening immune cell function. 134 Thus, immune resistance must be understood in
the spatial context of the cellular neighborhood to identify the speciﬁc cell states and gene signatures involved. Although next-generation spatia l
proﬁling methods enable researchers to experimentally investigate the heterogeneity of the TME, 135 an AIVC could extend these analyses to a
universal, pan-cancer framework, which can be personalized to individual patients. Using an AIVC model, cancer researchers should be able to
identify TME niches shared across multiple cancer types from many patients. Identifying pan-cancer markers can drive cancer treatment both by
highlighting new targets and also by identifying existing treatments that can be applied to new cancer types. 136 In this setting, the AIVC would
help identify the interactions associated with TME cell states and would search for similar states from any disease where existing treat-
ments exist.
Finally, the AIVC could greatly advance precision oncology.
137 Given that the AIVC will capture intrinsic variation, the genetic diversity of individual
patient’s cancers will be represented in any analyses. Although the AIVC would already accurately qualify the change in the expression of genes,
tumor sequencing data would allow it to model the change of function of those genes, for example, through loss of function, change in post-trans-
lational modiﬁcations, or rewiring of protein-protein interactions and signaling networks.
138
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7049
Perspective

By encouraging interdisciplinary collaborations in open sci-
ence—spanning academia, phila nthropy, and the biopharma
and AI industries—we posit that a comprehensive under-
standing of cellular mechanisms is within reach. AIVCs have
the potential to revolutionize the scientiﬁc process, lead to
the understanding of novel biological principles, and augment
human intelligence to underpi n future breakthroughs in pro-
grammable biology, drug discovery, and personalized medi-
cine ( Box 2 ).
AIVCs
Our view of an AIVC is a learned simulator of cells and cellular
systems under varying conditions and changing contexts, such
as differentiation states, perturbations, disease states, stochas-
tic ﬂuctuations, and environmental conditions ( Figure 1 ). In this
context, a virtual cell should integrate broad knowledge across
cell biology. VCs must work across biological scales, over
time, and across data modalities and should help reveal the
Box 2. Continued
DIAGNOSTIC VIRTUAL CELL MODELS FOR INDIVIDUAL PATIENTS
The AIVC could introduce a new approach to diagnostics that incorporates a personalized AIVC (or a digital twin139 ) to track a patient’s health and
suggest suitable interventions. The AIVC would create a detailed representation of each patient’s cells by incorporating speciﬁc patient data, suc h
as genetic sequences, single-cell proﬁles from blood, and tissue pathology images, along with additional clinical information from their health re -
cords. Periodic updates to each patient’s AIVC instance enable monitoring of evolving health conditions, prediction of upcoming adverse events,
and potential therapeutic outcomes.
Through additional updates from less costly assays, this virtual patient model could be progressively reﬁned and made more robust.
140 For
example, transcriptomic or genetic liquid biopsies can reveal signiﬁcant and diverse characteristics of a patient from a single test and could great ly
aid in the diagnosis of a broad spectrum of conditions. 141 Through the virtual cell’s implicit and structured representation of universal cell types and
states, one can envision the creation of patient models of inaccessible cell types, such as beta cells in the pancreas or neurons in the brain, gener-
ated after sampling accessible cell types such as blood or skin.
A HYPOTHESIS-GENERATING FRAMEWORK FOR SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
Traditionally, the biological research community has relied on computational models for analyzing data from past experiments based on an ex-
isting hypothesis. The virtual cell could switch the paradigm by computationally exploring a vast array of possible hypotheses throughin silico exper-
imentation. It could identify the most informative experiments for addressing speciﬁc biological questions, shifting the role of computational mo dels
from merely validating hypotheses or processing observations without a particular goal to generating speciﬁc sets of hypotheses to pursue.
This shift could greatly enhance the scientiﬁc discovery process: instead of conducting a single experiment followed by an in-depth analysis, sci-
entists can engage in a dynamic iterative interaction with the virtual cell. With each new piece of data, they can reﬁne their understanding of the
biological system and consult the virtual cell to identify what additional experimental data could be valuable. Ultimately, we may be able to perform
active learning with biologists in the loop and construct self-driving labs for efﬁcient and unbiased generation of virtual cells.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7050 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

programming language of cellular systems and provide an inter-
face to use it for engineering purposes.
In particular, an AIVC needs to have capabilities that allows re-
searchers to (1) create a universal representation (UR) of biolog-
ical states across species, modalities, datasets, and contexts,
including cell types, developmental stages, and external condi-
tions; (2) predict cellular function, behavior, and dynamics, as
well as uncover the underlying mechanisms; and (3) perform in
silico experiments to generate and test new scientiﬁc hypothe-
ses and guide data collection to efﬁciently expand the virtual
cell’s abilities.
Next, we elaborate on these key capabilities and discuss ap-
proaches for how to achieve them.
URs
An AIVC would map biological data to UR spaces ( Figure 1 A),
facilitating insights into shared states and serving as a compre-
hensive reference. These URs should integrate across three
physical scales—molecular, cellular, and multicellular—and
accommodate contributions from any relevant modality and
context ( Figure 1 A). This integration will allow researchers to
complement new data with existing information within the
AIVC, leveraging its extensive biological knowledge to bridge
gaps between different data. Such a comparison with prior
data would provide a comprehensive context for every
analysis.
Importantly, the multilevel representation should generalize
to new states that are not present within the data used to train
the AIVC. Such an emergent capability would unlock discov-
eries about biological states that have not been directly
observed or might not even occur in nature. For instance,
the AIVC’s exposure to similar instances during training,
such as inﬂammatory states in macrophages, might enable it
to predict previously unknown inﬂammatory states in micro-
glia. Additionally, the AIVC should be able to predict novel
states resulting from interventions (or, equivalently, interven-
tions needed to achieve a novel speciﬁed state) offering a
range of downstream applications in cell engineering and syn-
thetic biology.
Predicting cell behavior and understanding
mechanisms
A deﬁning function of an AIVC will be its ability to model cellular
responses and dynamics. By training on a wide range of snap-
shots, time-resolved, non-interventional, and interventional da-
tasets collected across contexts and scales, the AIVC can
develop an understanding of the molecular, cellular, and tissue
dynamics that occur under natural or engineered signals. These
signals include external and internal stresses or other factors
such as chemical (e.g., small molecules) or genetic (engineered
or natural) perturbations and their combinations. An AIVC should
be able to predict responses to perturbations that have not been
previously tested in the lab, while also accounting for the speciﬁc
features of the cellular context within which the perturbation is
being tested.
The AIVC should also have the capability to simulate the tempo-
ral evolution of alterations in cell states in response to both intrinsic
and extrinsic factors, along with the resulting multicellular spatial
arrangements. By modeling the transient nature of the overall
cell state and the continuous ﬂux in cellular conditions, the AIVC
could uncover previously unstudied trajectories in diverse dynamic
processes, such as development, maintenance of homeostasis,
pathogenesis, and disease progression. Another critical challenge
is understanding the molecular mechanisms underpinning
observed phenotypes and trajectories. The AIVC could propose
potential causal factors behind phenotypes by simulating the ef-
fects of different interventions. Through its multi-scale design,
the AIVC should be able to extrapolate the basis of cellular function
across scales and link intracellular processes to phenotypes at the
cell and tissue level. Thus, the AIVC opens new avenues for inves-
tigating mechanisms linked to diverse phenotypes and behaviors.
Although uncovering a phenotype’s causal factors may not al-
ways be feasible through computation alone, the AIVC has the
potential to reduce the space of possible hypotheses. Through
simulating the effects of different interventions, the AIVC could
propose potential causal factors behind phenotypes with corre-
sponding degrees of uncertainty, allowing scientists to validate
claims experimentally.
In silico experimentation and guiding data generation
For real-world utility, a deﬁning function of an AIVC will be its ability
to guide data generation and experiment design. An AIVC should
be queryable with computational twins of today’s laboratory ex-
periments, here called virtual instruments (VIs). Virtual experiments
could, for example, simulate experiments in a cell type that is chal-
lenging to cultivate in vitro or simulate expensive readouts from
low-cost measurements, such as single-cell transcriptomes from
label-free imaging.
39 Virtual experiments could also be used to
screen a vast number of possible perturbagens at a scale that
would be impossible in the lab. Such capabilities are invaluable
when considering the exponentially larger search space of combi-
natorial perturbations involving more than one perturbagen.
40–44
AIVCs will usher in a new pradigm of how computational sys-
tems are probed during the design of new biological experiments.
In this framework, an AIVC would not only design experiments to
validate speciﬁc scientiﬁc hypotheses but also to enhance its
own capabilities. Equipped with the ability to assign conﬁdence
values to its predictions, an AIVC could enable interactive
querying to guide experimentalists to the most efﬁcient path for
generating additional data for ﬁne-tuned improvement in low-
conﬁdence areas. Extended to an active and iterative lab-in-
the-loop process, we envision efﬁcient and focused expansion
of the AIVC’s performance. Ultimately, the AIVC might even be
able to identify key gaps in its own understanding of biology
and propose the most efﬁcient paths to bridge them.
45–47
BUILDING THE AIVC
We envision an AIVC as a comprehensive AI framework
composed of several interconnected foundation models that
represent dynamic biological systems at increasingly complex
levels of organization—from molecules to cells, tissues, and
beyond. Our approach has two main components: (1) a universal
multi-modal multi-scale biological state representation and (2) a
set of VIs, which are neural networks that manipulate or decode
these representations. Although there may be other approaches
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7051
Perspective

to building an AIVC, we believe this approach would provide a
scaffold that can be scaled in a collaborative and open way.
We use the term UR to refer to an embedding produced by a
multi-modal AIVC foundation model. An embedding is a learned
numerical representation of data in a continuous vector space.
The AIVC transforms high-dimensional multi-scale multi-modal
biological data into embeddings that retain meaningful relation-
ships and patterns.
The AIVC can capture cell biology at three distinct physical
scales by representing (1) molecules and their structures found
within individual cells, (2) individual cells, as spatial collections
of those interacting molecules and structures, and (3) how indi-
Figure 2. Overview of the AIVC
(A and B) (A) Similar to biological cells, (B) the AIVC
models cell biology across different physical
scales, including molecular, cellular, and multi-
cellular. Along the physical dimension, the ﬁrst
scale models the state and interactions of indi-
vidual molecules, such as those of the central
dogma, as well as additional molecules, such as
metabolites. Molecules can be represented as
sequences or atomic structures. The next scale
represents cells as collections of these molecules.
For example, such cells contain a genetic
sequence, RNA transcripts, and some quantities
of proteins. Molecules within cells have speciﬁc
locations that may be related to their function. The
ﬁnal scale models the interactions between cells
and how they communicate and form complex
tissues. Each scale relies on universal represen-
tations that are learned from multi-modal data and
are integrating URs from the previous scale.
(C and D) (C) To capture the behavior and dy-
namics of physical cells, its components, or col-
lections, (D) the AIVC comprises virtual in-
struments. On the cellular scale, for example,
manipulator VIs simulate how cell states change
as cells divide, migrate, develop from progenitor
states, or respond to perturbations through
learned transitions in the URs. Decoder VIs allow
for the decoding of the cell UR, e.g., to understand
phenotypic properties.
vidual cells interact with one another
and the non-cellular environment in a tis-
sue. Each of these scales is represented
by a distinct UR, building on abstractions
generated by the previous layer, thus link-
ing the different scales.
In the context of UR, VIs are neural net-
works that take URs as input and pro-
duce a desired output. We describe two
types of VIs: decoder VIs (or decoders)
that take a UR as an input and produce
human-understandable output, for
example, a cell type label or a synthetic
microscope image, and manipulator VIs
(or manipulators), which take a UR as an
input and produce another UR as an
output, for example, that of an altered
cell state after perturbation. Because
these instruments will operate over the
same representations, they can be
shared and reused across different use cases, experiments,
and datasets. Thus, we envision that any scientist will be able
to build a VI on top of a UR and share it with the community.
The building of VIs that closely resemble real instruments, such
as a microscope, has the potential to seed the development of
instrument-speciﬁc lab-in-the-loop systems.
Building UR across physical scales
The AIVC would be a multi-scale foundation model that learns
distinct representations of biological entities at each physical
scale ( Figure 2 C). These representations can be aggregated
together and transformed to produce representations at the
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7052 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

next higher physical scale. This recurring architectural motif can
be applied from the level of individual molecules to the scale of
entire tissues and organs granting the model consistency across
biological scales (Figure 2A). Each representation applies univer-
sally to a speciﬁc class of biological entities. This abstraction al-
lows the virtual cell to seamlessly evolve and incorporate new
data—whether from new modalities or from out-of-distribution
sources— within this general framework.
In the following sections, we discuss design principles and
data that could be used to construct each physical scale of the
AIVC bottom-up. Although many existing machine learning ar-
chitectures could be applied directly to the task of learning func-
tional representations of cellular components ( Box 3 ), we addi-
tionally suggest the incorporation of biological inductive biases
into the design of these representations, and further modeling in-
novations should drive the reﬁnement and success of these
models.
Molecular scale
The ﬁrst layer of the virtual cell represents individual molecular
species ( Figures 2 A and 2C). Although there are many different
classes of molecules present in a cell, a starting point for the
AIVC will be to model the three types of molecules of the central
dogma: DNA, RNA, and proteins. These can all be represented as
sequences of characters—nucleotides or amino acids.
48–53 Such
sequence data are particularly well suited for AI methods origi-
nally developed for natural language processing, such as large
language models (LLMs) (Box 3). Given the high-throughput mea-
surement capabilities for genomic sequences, there are substan-
tial and growing amounts of training data available. This abun-
dance of data, combined with simple objective functions (such
as predicting masked letters in a sequence), provides the key in-
gredients for effectively training models to generate an initial mo-
lecular UR. Furthermore, a biological language model could be
trained on all three modalities simultaneously, thus maximizing
interoperability and training corpus size. Despite its inherent
compatibility with transformers, speciﬁc considerations around
masking and attention mechanisms must be addressed when
applying these models to biological sequence data as opposed
to natural language. Although language modeling approaches
have been extensively studied for these core molecules and
have proven successful for some of their chemical modiﬁca-
tions
54 and various other molecules, such as glycans, lipids,
and metabolites, 55,56 they may struggle with other molecular
constituents of the cell. Such modeling difﬁculties might be exac-
erbated for data that are difﬁcult to ﬁt into a sequence or very
small molecules. Given that the primary building blocks of these
entities are atoms, a neural network trained to model molecules at
the atomic level
32,57 could be a more general choice for this layer.
However, models with atomic resolution introduce a substantial
computational burden and might be constrained by the limited
availability of training data. Although atomic-based modeling is
highly accurate for many static structures, it cannot yet represent
the full dynamic range of chemistry that occurs at this scale.
Therefore, a broader, evolutionarily informed representation
such as that of sequences may be preferred.
Cellular scale
The next level of abstraction models individual cell states
(Figures 2 A and 2C). As cellular function is underpinned by the
molecular interactions and signaling networks formed in a cell,
a cellular UR can be built using representations of molecular
and other (e.g., imaging) features, describing the organization
and abundance of molecular components. The key step here
would be to integrate learned representations of molecules
with their quantities and appropriately abstracted locations and
timestamps to create a uniﬁed representation of the cell.
58–60
Data for the cellular UR consist of measurements mapped to a
single-cell level, such as measurements of the transcriptome
(single-cell RNA sequencing [scRNA-seq]), chromatin accessi-
bility (scATAC-seq), chromatin modiﬁcation, transcription factor
binding, and proteome.
61 Imaging technologies measure cell
morphology at subcellular resolution, often together with molec-
ular information. 29,62,63 For example, ﬂuorescence confocal mi-
croscopy can help resolve the subcellular location of the human
proteome.64 Live-cell imaging65 enables the study of proteins in
living cells using time-lapse microscopy. Cryoelectron micro-
scopy determines biomolecular structures at near-atomic reso-
lution.
66,67 Super-resolution microscopy offers deeper insights
into molecular processes through single-molecule imaging in
living systems. 68,69 Complementing imaging approaches, mass
spectrometry, and proximity-dependent labeling can unveil pro-
tein-protein associations and provide deeper insights into cell
structure and signaling network rewiring. 70,71
From a model architecture perspective, vision transformers 72
or models leveraging convolutional neural networks
(CNNs)73,74 are widely applicable to biological images to model
across multiple imaging channels capturing different biological
features,75,76 while being robust to distribution shift and batch
variability.77 Autoencoders and transformers have been suc-
cessfully applied for learning representations for sequence-
based data.
59,78,79 Using AI algorithms to integrate different
data modalities collected with sequencing and imaging technol-
ogies creates a multi-view model of the cell that can be both dy-
namic and predictive.
80,81
As the AIVC model grows in complexity, it is crucial to also
model cellular organelles and membraneless compartments 82
as units that play speciﬁc roles within the cell. Robustly capturing
the functions of these units is vital to ensure accurate predic-
tions, mechanistic interpretability, and model generalizability.
Given their prevalence, the cellular UR will initially rely on tran-
scriptomics measurements, whereas imaging modalities will be
key for continued modeling of cellular spatial organization and
dynamics.
Multicellular scale
At the third layer of abstraction, the AIVC models the organiza-
tion of cells into a multicellular UR (Figures 2A and 2C). This layer
allows for the exploration of how cell-cell interactions, largely
governed by spatial proximity, combine into tissues, organs,
and, ultimately, whole organisms. Multicellular interactions can
be analyzed after tissue dissociation (such as in scRNA-seq)
83
or in situ in a 2D section or 3D volume, where the tissue structure
is preserved. Building the AIVC will require integration across
available modalities that provide spatial insights, i.e., both spatial
molecular proﬁling, as well as non-molecular tissue imag-
ing data.
There are multiple methods to proﬁle the spatial location of
RNA
84 and proteins 85 in cells, along with various imaging
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7053
Perspective

Box 3. AI techniques for building the AIVC
The AIVC will connect a number of diverse neural network architectures. Although these architectures may not have been purpose-built for biological
applications, they have each demonstrated success when matched with speciﬁc biological modalities and inductive biases. In many cases, these
architectures may be exchangeable, and one must weigh their individual trade-offs in accuracy, speed, and generalizability. Beyond this, the com-
munity is actively developing AI architectures tailored to the characteristics of (large) biological datasets.
TRANSFORMERS
A transformer neural network 30 comprises multiple transformer layers, each taking a series of tokens (discrete pieces of information such as
words, RNA molecules, or gene representations) as input—initial tokens for the ﬁrst layer and outputs from the preceding layer for subsequent
ones. Within each layer, tokens use self-attention to integrate context from other tokens, enhancing their own representations, which are then pro-
cessed through a feed forward network. This architecture, which fundamentally requires only a collection of tokens,
adapts well across various applications and use cases.
The collection of tokens passed to a transformer does not have any ordering by default. Additionally, the self-attention mechanism, the core of the
success of the transformer, can be taken as a strong biological inductive bias. For instance, in representing cells through their RNA molecules de-
tected via scRNA-seq, each RNA molecule, represented as a token, interacts with others, modeling gene interactions through self-attention.
30
Customizing input tokens with numerical representations of genes further allows the integration of diverse biological data scales, from individua l
genes to whole cells. 59,60
Additionally, introducing positional encodings to tokens enables transformers to process sequences, such as natural language, 30 or biological
sequences, such as DNA, 48,142 by incorporating sequence-speciﬁc dependencies. This approach is crucial in applications such as masked lan-
guage modeling, where the model predicts missing tokens in sequences, enhancing its understanding of contextual relationships within data. In-
novations continue to reﬁne transformers, increasing their capacity to handle longer sequences and improving efﬁciency, with advancements
such as state-space models enabling the generation of extensive DNA sequences.
51
CNN
A CNN is a deep learning model primarily used for analyzing images. 73,74 It consists of multiple layers that automatically and adaptively learn
spatial hierarchies of features through backpropagation. This learning is facilitated by convolutional layers that apply ﬁlters to local patches o f input
data, pooling layers that reduce dimensionality, and fully connected layers that interpret the features extracted to make decisions.
In the ﬁeld of biology, CNNs have proven invaluable for tasks involving image data due to their ability to detect complex patterns and structures,
such as microscope images of cells and tissues. Here, CNNs play a critical role in multiplex imaging,143 where multiple targets within a single sample
are labeled and visualized simultaneously. This technique is particularly useful in studying the complex interactions of different molecules or ce ll
types within a heterogeneous tissue environment. 144 Another notable application is in the analysis of H&E-stained tissue sections, commonly
used in clinical pathology. 145 Lastly, in live-cell imaging, CNNs are employed to track dynamic changes within cells or even single molecules
over time, providing insights into cell migration, responses to treatment, or the movement and interaction of individual molecules within cells,
revealing crucial biological processes at a molecular level.
146
Beyond their traditional use in image processing, CNNs can also be applied to model sequence data, such as DNA sequences, where they identify
patterns and features that are predictive of biological functions. 147 Despite their extensive utility, CNNs are increasingly being supplemented or
(Continued on next page)
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7054 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

methods for select molecular species (e.g., immunohistochem-
istry) or with stains for tissue structure alone (e.g., hematoxylin
and eosin [H&E]). Spatial molecular biology is currently a very
active area of research and method development. Although pub-
licly available data are still limited, we foresee a rapid develop-
ment in this domain providing multi-omic 2D and 3D datasets.
A more generalized data generation effort together with open
frameworks for spatial data
86 could greatly accelerate modeling
at the multicellular scale.
The relative organization of cells within a 2D tissue section and
3D tissue volume can be represented using a graph or point
cloud. The multicellular UR can be derived from such data using
Box 3. Continued
replaced by vision transformer models, 72 which leverage self-attention mechanisms to process entire images in parallel. These models can often
achieve higher accuracy on tasks where understanding the global context within the image is crucial.
DIFFUSION MODELS
Diffusion models are a class of generative deep learning models that have recently gained attention for their ability to generate high-quality,
diverse samples across various domains.148 They operate by gradually transforming a distribution of random noise into a structured output (images,
text, cellular states, etc.) through a process that mimics a physical diffusion process. Building up on diffusion model architectures, approaches s uch
as ﬂow matching methods can also model the distributional evolution over time,149 making them especially powerful in biological applications where
dynamic changes and temporal progression are critical. Flow matching methods thus capture and generate sequences of data that reﬂect contin-
uous transformations, such as the developmental stages of cells over time and space or the response of biological systems to treatments. 87 The
ability of diffusion and ﬂow matching models to learn and replicate complex distributions, combined with the temporal and spatial modeling capa-
bilities of ﬂow matching methods, makes them particularly suited for tasks that involve high-dimensional, intricate data structures typical of bio log-
ical systems.
GNNs
GNNs are a set of architectures that can model graphical data.150 Graphs, sets of nodes connected by edges, are useful representations for many
kinds of biological data. When modeling a biological system, a GNN could be a good choice if a graph structure represents some core inductive bias.
For example, a protein structure151 can be thought of as a graph where residues are nodes, and their bonds are edges. Cells in a tissue form a graph:
each cell is a node, and the cells it is physically proximal to are connected by edges. 152,153 In both cases, the graph represents how nodes are phys-
ically proximal to each other. For spatially organized cells, the graph represents how they may pass chemical signals between one another.
GNNs can be used to make predictions about individual nodes, edges, or the graph as a whole. 154 For simplicity, in the following section, we
describe a node-based GNN. At each layer, a node updates its representation using a neural network, which can take in that node’s current rep-
resentation, in addition to the representations of the node’s neighbors, which are connected by an edge. By stacking GNN layers, a node can receive
‘‘messages’’ from neighboring nodes at increasing distances, ‘‘hops,’’ from it. Nodes and edges can both be initialized with different features, which
control their ﬁnal representation and what messages they pass to their neighbors. For example, a GNN trained on spatial transcriptomic data could
take node features to be the virtual cell representation of each cell’s gene expression. The GNN would then update those representations to include
context about each cell’s neighbors, helping to identify spatial interactions and niches.
153
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7055
Perspective

graph-learning techniques, such as graph neural networks
(GNNs) and equivariant neural networks (ENNs). For image-
based data, convolutional neural networks or vision transformers
can be applied ( Box 3).
Predicting cell behavior and understanding
mechanisms
VIs are the ‘‘tools’’ that operate on UR embeddings and perform
various functions and tasks. By altering URs of molecules, cells,
and tissues, manipulators can abstract complex dynamic pro-
cesses (Figure 2B) more simply as transitions between (distribu-
tions of) their representations ( Figure 2 D). Similarly, decoders
can take an embedding of biological entities and predict one
or more concrete properties, for example, physical structure,
cell type/state, ﬁtness, expression, or drug response.
The design of a wide array of manipulators provides us with an
unprecedented set of tools for modeling cell behavior and dy-
namics: generative AI approaches, such as diffusion models
87
or autoregressive transformers, 88 i.e., model architectures that
capture heterogeneity and parameterize continuous time dy-
namics, can predict a future state or evolution of a cell or molec-
ular state (Box 3).
57,89 Using integrated data from time-lapse im-
aging,65 gene expression proﬁles, 83 and other modalities,
manipulators can allow inferring the phenotypic progression
from stem cell to differentiated cell, while capturing the inﬂuence
of both genetic factors and environmental conditions—through
learned interpolations and extrapolations between multi-scale
URs of different cell states. Similarly, they allow predicting the ef-
fect of treatments on patients, given a virtual representation of a
patient’s molecular proﬁle.
Furthermore, variations in cellular URs can be linked to corre-
sponding changes in molecular states or their spatial localiza-
tion, inﬂuenced by downstream factors, such as genetic variants
or functional changes in proteins, which are represented in a
lower scale of the AIVC. Leveraging the ability of manipulators
to model temporally resolved molecular and cellular events, de-
coders of the AIVC could potentially identify cellular compo-
nents, molecular pathways, and their interactions that contribute
to each prediction and process. As such, the multi-scale design
of the AIVC may unveil mechanistic hypotheses of such pro-
cesses.
Despite the remarkable advancements in protein modeling,
the ﬁeld continues to struggle in modeling dynamic molecular
processes using foundation models. There will likely be areas
of cell modeling, including dynamics, which pose similar chal-
lenges. For instance, the modeling of intricate networks of tran-
sient and weak molecular interactions, which play a crucial role
in rapid ﬁne-tuning of cellular signaling and formation of cell bio-
logical features such as condensates, may pose similar chal-
lenges. Consequently, we foresee a need for advanced data
collection and modeling methodologies capable of capturing
the dynamics of cellular processes, akin to those encountered
in protein modeling. At the same time, although some functional-
ities of the AIVC heavily depend on such solutions, others (e.g.,
certain predictive functionalities) may be successful even
without them. That is one of the appealing properties of multi-
modal AI models with emergent properties and why developing
the AIVC now is so compelling.
In silico experimentation and guiding data generation
Manipulator VIs operating in the UR space could further enable
the exploration of a broad range of hypotheses through in silico
experiments that virtually perturb a cell model. This might be
achieved by predicting changes in the URs following a perturba-
tion prompt ( Figure 2D).
40,42–44
The design of manipulators that predict transitions in the UR
upon an in silico input can build on conditional generative models:
deep learning architectures such as conditional deep generative
models31 allow generating the desired UR based on the property
or context of interest (Box 3). Here, high-throughput perturbation
screens—based on RNA-seq, 28,83,90 optical pooled screens
(OPS),29,39,91 or other technologies—offer a rich resource
through which the AIVC can be trained to predict these effects.
By conditioning on speciﬁc perturbations—such as environ-
mental changes, genetic mutations, or chemical treatments—
the generative model might produce a new UR reﬂecting the pre-
dicted cellular response. This conditioning could be achieved
through learned or pre-computed embeddings of the affected
molecular targets. Chemical compounds, small molecules, and
metabolites could be embedded based on their chemical proper-
ties. Additionally, LLMs trained on comprehensive scientiﬁc liter-
ature and biological databases, such as Gene Ontology or drug
banks, could further provide a rich contextual background used
for conditioning the generative model, e.g., through considering
wide range of interactions and side effects.
VIs can be designed so that predictions are accompanied by
estimates of model uncertainty.
92 Under a Bayesian formulation
of its predictive function, the predictions made for cell perturba-
tion outcomes could include an uncertainty score, either implic-
itly via inference, deep kernels,
93,94 or through explicit estimation
of the full posterior over model parameters. 95,96 Some practical
approaches utilize model ensembles 97 or conformal predic-
tions.98,99 By assigning speciﬁc conﬁdence levels to its predic-
tions, the AIVC can call methods for computing the expected
value of additional data or approximations referred to in machine
learning as active learning to guide experimental data collec-
tion
45 for expanding its UR. Alternatively, methods for computing
the expected value of information could be used to guide data
generation with the goal of optimizing a desired biological prop-
erty.
92 Lastly, through its ability to conduct in silico experiments
and suggest additional informative experiments, the AIVC could
become an integrative part of lab-in-the-loop schemes. This al-
lows not only for a seamless experimental validation of its predic-
tions but also a sequence of experiments, predictions, and gen-
erations of hypotheses that gradually improve our systematic
understanding of molecular circuits that drive biological
functions.
DATA NEEDS AND REQUIREMENTS
A key consideration for the AIVC is which datasets and modal-
ities must be collected to enable its effective construction. Unlike
traditional experimental design, where data are generated to test
speciﬁc scientiﬁc hypotheses, data collection for training the
AIVC should be focused on ensuring the broad applicability
and generalizability expected of the AIVC. To meet these ambi-
tions, data would ideally span different domains and modalities,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7056 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

capture the heterogeneity and diversity of biological variability,
and enable models to distinguish between technical (measure-
ment) noise, stochastic biological variation, and physiological
differences.
Data generation will require simultaneous exploration of tem-
poral and physical scales, while allowing for system perturba-
tions. Here, classical imaging technologies, 65,100,101 including
live-cell, and newer structural imaging technologies, such as cry-
oelectron tomography and soft X-ray tomography,
66,102,103 as
well as novel spatial omics technologies, 104,105 offer opportu-
nities to model biomolecules and functions across scales.
Furthermore, biological processes span a vast range of time-
scales, from the fastest reactions happening in picoseconds to
a cell division progressing over hours to a day, tumor develop-
ment occurring over years, and neurodegeneration over de-
cades. The recent construction of universal cell atlases
101,106
may serve as a powerful resource for modeling cellular behavior
over longer timescales, such as tissue formation. New ap-
proaches will be needed to build comparable datasets that cap-
ture the behavior of cells on shorter timescales, e.g., through
methods such as live-cell imaging. Besides molecular measure-
ments, an important aspect of data collection will lie in the mea-
surement of biophysical and biochemical cellular properties to
provide boundaries of physical and chemical realism to the AIVC.
Another important driver for the development of AIVCs will be
multi-modal datasets. For example, datasets that bridge molec-
ular and spatial scales, such as single-cell transcriptomics data
combined with histology to understand how cells interact and
what molecular signatures underpin the formation of specialized
spatial niches.
107 Further technological development is needed
to collect multi-modal data that better capture the relationship
between molecular signatures, cell behavior, cellular regulation,
and organization.
Although a core interest of virtual cell modeling will focus on
human datasets for the purpose of understanding disease and
aiding the development of novel therapeutics, human datasets
are limited in our ability to perform controlled experimentation
and perturbations in vivo.
Here, the ﬁeld of 3D tissue biology, including culture systems,
such as organoids, is emerging as a tool to study the complex-
ities of tissue architecture and function
108 in a 3D environment,
while allowing perturbations of the system. Another critical
avenue to surpass this limitation will be to perform diverse, or-
ganism-wide proﬁles of species spanning evolutionary history,
across perturbations and under various conditions.
109–111
Ideally, large datasets could be collected across all three phys-
ical scales, allowing the AIVC to extend beyond disease research
into other areas such as industrial biotechnology, agricultural
biotechnology, infectious diseases, and climate change. Howev-
er, based on data collection trends for the cellular and multicel-
lular scales, modeling animal cells remains the most realistic.
Finally, a key aspect of biological data generation will be the
exploration of combinatorial spaces: biological spaces are
commonly high dimensional, and enumerating their variants is
intractable in general, e.g., when considering all possible vari-
ants of a genome. Even for combinations of a small number
of entities, exempliﬁed in the case of enumerating pairs or
sets of perturbations,
47,90 experimental design becomes
exceedingly challenging. Because combinatorial possibilities
quickly expand well beyond what is practical experimentally,
or even computationally, new methods for their exploration
must be developed.
How much data are needed to build the AIVC?
The scale of raw biological data is undeniable, but so is the sheer
nominal size of even one human cell system, making ﬁrst princi-
ple estimates challenging. For instance, the Short Read Archive
of biological sequence data holds over 14 petabytes of informa-
tion,
112 which is more than 1,000 times larger than the dataset
used to train ChatGPT. 113 Large parts of these data may be
redundant or have diminishing returns if used for training, and
the scaling laws for models’ performances must be investigated
thoroughly.
In addition to data size, data diversity and quality are critical to
ensure model performance.
114 Data from humans and model or-
ganisms, such as mice and Escherichia coli, are unequally repre-
sented in sequence and literature databases, which when used
for training, encode strong species biases. 114 Other biases, for
example, in terms of sex, speciﬁc diseases, or human ancestral
populations could also reduce the impact of AIVC models. 115
Although efforts on the data side are required, the AI models
driving the AIVC must be designed to withstand and adapt to
these challenges, i.e., exhibit robustness in their ability to inte-
grate datasets of various origins and quality. This is crucial given
both the rapid pace of advances in lab technologies (which pre-
clude standardization on a single platform) and the broad diver-
sity of modalities and cell systems that must be encompassed by
the AIVC. As virtual cell efforts mature, the dialog between the
scientists who develop models, those who generate experi-
mental data, and funding organizations must be further inten-
siﬁed.
MODEL EVALUATION
A more important question for the development of AIVCs may
not be ‘‘how do we build them?’’ but rather ‘‘how do we build
trust in their competence and ﬁdelity?’’ To this end, a compre-
hensive and adaptable benchmarking framework will be needed.
Although various frameworks already exist for tackling speciﬁc
biological questions (for example, protein structure prediction
models
89 were developed in the context of the CASP evaluation
framework), the AIVC will need to demonstrate generalizability
across numerous biological contexts and downstream tasks. It
must account for dynamic distributions that evolve due to envi-
ronmental changes, infections, genetic variants, and other
such factors causing distribution shifts.
116
Even beyond generalizability, emergent capabilities, such as
those associated with LLMs, could enable AIVC models to
extrapolate to truly out-of-distribution data. In a biological
context it may be difﬁcult to decide how this boundary is deﬁned
during evaluation. New molecules, new cell states, and even new
species could be considered within the training distribution. A
new molecule could have homologs, including remote homo-
logs, within the dataset. A new cell type or state could execute
gene programs and regulatory networks found in existing cell
types. A new strain could be closely related to existing species
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7057
Perspective

in the training data or live in similar environmental niches. Extrap-
olation to new data could then be limited to consider only the
design of biological entities that do not naturally occur. This
type of evaluation is already considered within the molecular
design space because language-model-created proteins, such
as esmGFP
52 or OpenCrispr1, 53 highlight how different they
are from any of their naturally occurring counterparts. If extrapo-
lation is a goal when designing these models, it is possible that
additional inductive biases, ﬁne tuning, or preference optimiza-
tion using biomechanical, physics-based, or mechanistic
modeling
117 would prove necessary.
The evaluation of AIVCs should prioritize both generalizability,
as well as discovering new biology. Generalizability measures
how well the model performs in unseen contexts, such as novel
cell types and genetic backgrounds. It can be evaluated through
a cross-modal reconstruction task, such as predicting gene
expression given the morphology of a previously unseen cell or
the next image in a sequence of microscopy images of cell state.
Assessing generalizability builds conﬁdence in the AIVC’s ability
to capture core biological processes and understand how they
vary across different contexts. Establishing such cross-modal
benchmarks to link scales and modalities in cell biology is of
imminent priority to the research community because these
tasks are both biologically useful and well deﬁned.
Ultimately, AIVC models should be judged on their ability to
unlock new ways of understanding biology. Such an evaluation
will ensure that model development is aligned with biological
relevance. The most useful initial accomplishments will likely
be to generate valuable testable hypotheses. For this purpose,
validation datasets that are related to phenotypes that are exper-
imentally veriﬁable may be suitable, such as growth rate of cells,
molecular proﬁles, disrupted protein-protein interactions, or
transcription factor binding.
As the capabilities of AIVCs improve, we must consider
whether statistical measures of performance are adequate, or
if interpretability and biological causality would be core re-
quirements.
INTERPRETABILITY AND INTERACTION
One of the hallmarks of scientiﬁc discovery in biology has been
the creation of mechanistic models of a phenomenon under
observation. When creating virtual cells, we may have to forgo
our ability to build fully mechanistic models in favor of learning in-
teractions that will generalize from data and predict beyond the
observations. However, it is still desirable to strive toward
increased interpretability.
Every AIVC prediction could be substantiated with the corre-
sponding multi-scale interactions that determine resulting
states, e.g., understanding how a cellular subsystem or protein
complex is disrupted in a diseased tissue can aid development
of therapeutic interventions.
118,119 The modular structure of the
AIVC will enable researchers to pinpoint speciﬁc genes, pro-
teins, or molecular processes involved in each predicted
behavior. Patterns in the wiring of large models can also be
leveraged to uncover combinatorial biological interactions,
such as those between proteins, which can be projected to
interpretable spaces without restricting the generality of the
original model. Although many capabilities of the AIVC rely on
predictive tasks, generating mechanistic hypotheses could pro-
vide experimental routes to understand and explore the AIVC’s
predictions further and will be vital for the adoption and use
of AIVCs.
Ultimately, it will be of key interest to build an interactive layer
for the AIVC that enables researchers of varying expertise to
grasp and utilize its predictions effectively. AI agents, built us-
ing LLMs, could serve as virtual research assistants, providing
an intuitive interface for non-experts.
46,120 Leveraging their
extensive knowledge of scientiﬁc literature, these language
models can offer deeper insig hts into the predictions made
by the AIVC.
AN OPEN COLLABORATIVE APPROACH
Creating an AIVC requires tremendous investment, diverse
backgrounds, and many iterations and can only be advanced
by a concerted open science effort. As a scientiﬁc community,
we must strive to ensure that both the development and usage
of virtual cells are accessible and responsive to the entire scien-
tiﬁc community. These efforts would greatly beneﬁt from open
data resources and data standards, a collaborative platform
for cell modeling, and, especially, open benchmark datasets
and common validation strategies to ensure their biological ﬁdel-
ity and real-world utility. Such a collaborative program could
greatly accelerate progress across individual efforts and unify
scientiﬁc research at a global scale, connecting myriad
smaller-scale efforts.
To achieve this, multiple key parameters need to be consid-
ered. First, we must ensure that A IVCs represent and beneﬁt all
of humanity, with open data that captures human ancestral,
sex, and geographic diversity.
121 Ensuring that such datasets
reﬂect human diversity, while safeguarding individuals’ privacy
is a principal challenge. Second, as the size of AIVC models in-
creases, the cost of training, ﬁne tuning, or using them as is will
also grow. Investments in diverse data collection, infrastruc-
ture, and a platform for hosting virtual cell models will be critical
to ensure representation, accessibility, and beneﬁt to the
broader scientiﬁc community. The platform should foster
open and collaborative development of AIVCs, enabling active
collaboration between biologists, clinicians, statisticians, and
computer scientists. This platfor m should facilitate swift itera-
tions between the lab and the modeling environment and offer
opportunities to quickly test and benchmark new models.
Third, synergistic collaboration among stakeholders is needed
across the biomedical ecosystem, including philanthropy,
academia, biopharma, and the AI industry. Pre-competitive
collaborations can greatly accelerate our collective progress
toward creating AIVCs. Beside s the synchronization with data
generators and other modeling efforts, collaboration with regu-
latory authorities and bioethics experts are crucial for bench-
marking and establishing new norms that will expedite the
deployment of AIVCs, while complying with legal requirements
and setting standards for ethical issues for responsible use of
virtual cells.
This article is intended to serve as a primer for the formation of
a collaborative research agenda and roadmap for a large-scale,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7058 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

long-term initiative for developing and implementing AI-powered
VCs. If successful, such interactive AIVC models, capable of
simulating cellular biology, have the potential to fundamentally
change how cell biology research is done. We foresee a future
where AIVC platforms function as open, interconnected hubs
for collaborative development and broad deployment of cell
models to researchers but also as education hubs delivering
training to researchers, as well as providing engagement activ-
ities for educators, patients, and the public.
OUTLOOK AND REASONS FOR OPTIMISM
The genetics and genomics communities have created large
reference datasets, such as the human genome project,
23
HapMap,122 the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), 123 ENCODE,124
the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project, 125 the Human
Protein Atlas (HPA), 64,126 the Human Cell Atlas (HCA), 24 and a
growing number of deeply phenotyped, population-scale bio-
bank efforts. 127 Thanks to these projects, massive reference
data are now available to train machine learning models.
Although these efforts will continue to grow, they also catalyze
a new, parallel effort: creating a virtual simulation of cell biology,
a new process for scientiﬁc inquiry.
The result, the AIVC has the potential to revolutionize the sci-
entiﬁc process, leading to future breakthroughs in biomedical
research, personalized medicine, drug discovery, cell engineer-
ing, and programmable biology. Acting as a virtual laboratory,
the AIVC could facilitate a seamless interface between data
derived from in silico experimentation and results from physical
laboratories. As such, we expect the AIVC to contribute to a
more uniﬁed view of biological processes, fostering alignment
among scientists on how emergent properties in biology arise.
By bridging the worlds of computer systems, modern genera-
tive AI and AI agents, and biology, the AIVC could ultimately
enable scientists to understand cells as information processing
systems and build virtual depictions of life. As the AIVC expands
the understanding of cellular and molecular systems, it will also
increasingly allow us to program them and design novel syn-
thetic ones. AI models have already been used to design new
CRISPR enzymes,
53 functional proteins,128 and even entire pro-
karyotic genomes. 51 The rapid progress in the precision of cell
and genome engineering tools will accelerate this shift and
different instantiations of the AIVC will compete in their ability
to engineer new, functional biology capabilities as much as in
their ability to represent and simulate biology.
Finally, we staunchly advocate the role for open science ap-
proaches, where the scientiﬁc community readily shares data,
models, and benchmarks, where ﬁndings and insights are
contextualized, and where a climate of perpetual improvement
is fostered. We welcome and encourage all stakeholders
across sectors and domains to engage in this endeavor. With
a massive scientiﬁc undertaking and shared goals, open
sharing of insights, and the power of safe, ethical, and reliable
AI, we believe that we are stepping into a new era of scientiﬁc
exploration and understanding. The conﬂuence of AI and
biology, as encapsulated by AIVCs, signals a paradigm shift
in biology and shines as a beacon of optimism for unraveling
multiple mysteries of the cell.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Rok Sosi /C20c, Charilaos Kanatsoulis, Lata Nair, Kexin Huang, Hanchen
Wang, Minkai Xu, Michael Bereket, Romain Lopez, Takamasa Kudo, Ayush
Agrawal, Arnuv Tandon, Mika Jain, Michihiro Yasunaga, Tim Jing, Michael
Moor, George Crowley, Maria Brbi /C19c, Andrew Tolopko, Ivana Jelic, Ana-
Maria Istrate, Sara Simmonds, Maximilian Lombardo, Pablo Garcia-Nieto,
Mike Lin, Noorsher Ahmed, William Leineweber, Jan N. Hansen, Orit
Rozenblatt-Rosen, Gita Mahmoudabadi, Zoe Piran, Adam Gayoso, Wei
Ouyang, and Anshul Kundaje for discussions. J.L. was supported by NSF un-
der nos. OAC-1835598 (CINES), CCF-1918940 (Expeditions), and DMS-
2327709 (IHBEM); Stanford Data Applications Initiative; Wu Tsai Neurosci-
ences Institute; Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI; Chan Zuckerberg
Initiative; Amazon; Genentech; GSK; Hi- Tachi; SAP; and UCB. E.L. was sup-
ported by Schmidt Futures, the Bridge2AI Program (NIH Common Fund; OT2
OD032742), the Cancer Cell Map Initiative (NCI Center for Cancer Systems
Biology; U54 CA274502), the Wallenberg Foundation (2021.0346), Stanford
Institute for Human-Centered AI, Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, Phil & Penny
Knight Initiative for Brain Resilience at the Wu Tsai Neurosciences Institute,
Danaher, and Param Hansa Philanthropies.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
C.B. and A.V.R. are employees of Genentech, a member of the Roche Group.
A.V.R. has equity in Roche. A.V.R. was a co-founder and equity holder of
Celsius Therapeutics and is an equity holder in Immunitas. Until July 31,
2020, A.V.R. was an S.A.B. member of ThermoFisher Scientiﬁc, Syros Pharma-
ceuticals, Neogene Therapeutics, and Asimov. A.V.R. is a named inventor on
multiple ﬁled patents related to single-cell and spatial genomics, including for
scRNA-seq, spatial transcriptomics, Perturb-Seq, compressed experiments,
and PerturbView. E.L. is an advisor for the Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative Founda-
tion, Element Biosciences, Cartography Biosciences, Pﬁzer, Santa Ana Bio,
and Pixelgen Technologies. N.J.S. is an employee of EvolutionaryScale, PBC.
REFERENCES
1. Slepchenko, B.M., Schaff, J.C., Macara, I., and Loew, L.M. (2003). Quan-
titative cell biology with the Virtual Cell. Trends Cell Biol. 13, 570–576.
2. Johnson, G.T., Agmon, E., Akamatsu, M., Lundberg, E., Lyons, B.,
Ouyang, W., Quintero-Carmona, O.A., Riel-Mehan, M., Rafelski, S.,
and Horwitz, R. (2023). Building the next generation of virtual cells to un-
derstand cellular biology. Biophys. J. 122, 3560–3569.
3. Marx, V. (2023). How to build a virtual embryo. Nat. Methods 20,
1838–1843.
4. Goldberg, A.P., Szigeti, B., Chew, Y.H., Sekar, J.A., Roth, Y.D., and Karr,
J.R. (2018). Emerging whole-cell modeling principles and methods. Curr.
Opin. Biotechnol. 51, 97–102.
5. Georgouli, K., Yeom, J.-S., Blake, R.C., and Navid, A. (2023). Multi-scale
models of whole cells: progress and challenges. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 11,
1260507.
6. Marucci, L., Barberis, M., Karr, J., Ray, O., Race, P.R., de Souza Andrade,
M., Grierson, C., Hoffmann, S.A., Landon, S., Rech, E., et al. (2020). Com-
puter-aided whole-cell design: Taking a holistic approach by integrating
synthetic with systems biology. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 8, 942.
7. Lauffenburger, D.A., and Linderman, J.J. (1996). Receptors: models for
binding, trafﬁcking, and signaling (Oxford University Press) .
8. Karr, J.R., Sanghvi, J.C., Macklin, D.N., Gutschow, M.V., Jacobs, J.M.,
Bolival, B., Assad-Garcia, N., Glass, J.I., and Covert, M.W. (2012). A
whole-cell computational model predicts phenotype from genotype.
Cell 150, 389–401.
9. Mangan, S., and Alon, U. (2003). Structure and function of the feed-for-
ward loop network motif. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 11980–11985.
10. Zopf, C.J., Quinn, K., Zeidman, J., and Maheshri, N. (2013). Cell-cycle
dependence of transcription dominates noise in gene expression.
PLoS Comput. Biol. 9, e1003161.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7059
Perspective

11. Eling, N., Morgan, M.D., and Marioni, J.C. (2019). Challenges in
measuring and understanding biological noise. Nat. Rev. Genet. 20,
536–548.
12. Hellweger, F.L., Clegg, R.J., Clark, J.R., Plugge, C.M., and Kreft, J.-U.
(2016). Advancing microbial sciences by individual-based modelling.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 14, 461–471.
13. Gorochowski, T.E. (2016). Agent-based modelling in synthetic biology.
Essays Biochem. 60, 325–336.
14. Thiele, I., Jamshidi, N., Fleming, R.M., and Palsson, B. (2009). Genome-
scale reconstruction of Escherichia coli’s transcriptional and translational
machinery: a knowledge base, its mathematical formulation, and its func-
tional characterization. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5, e1000312.
15. Odell, G.M., and Foe, V.E. (2008). An agent-based model contrasts
opposite effects of dynamic and stable microtubules on cleavage furrow
positioning. J. Cell Biol. 183, 471–483.
16. Popov, K., Komianos, J., and Papoian, G.A. (2016). MEDYAN: mechano-
chemical simulations of contraction and polarity alignment in actomyosin
networks. PLoS Comput. Biol. 12, e1004877.
17. Burke, P.E.P., Campos, C.B.L., Costa, L.D.F., and Quiles, M.G. (2020).
M. G. A biochemical network modeling of a whole-cell. Sci. Rep.
10, 13303.
18. Li, G., Liu, L., Du, W., and Cao, H. (2023). Local ﬂux coordination and
global gene expression regulation in metabolic modeling. Nat. Commun.
14, 5700.
19. Fang, X., Lloyd, C.J., and Palsson, B.O. (2020). Reconstructing organ-
isms in silico: genome-scale models and their emerging applications.
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 18, 731–743.
20. Stevens, J.A., Gru¨ newald, F., van Tilburg, P.A.M., Ko ¨ nig, M., Gilbert,
B.R., Brier, T.A., Thornburg, Z.R., Luthey-Schulten, Z., and Marrink,
S.J. (2023). Molecular dynamics simulation of an entire cell. Front.
Chem. 11, 1106495.
21. Maritan, M., Autin, L., Karr, J., Covert, M.W., Olson, A.J., and Goodsell,
D.S. (2022). Building structural models of a whole mycoplasma cell.
J. Mol. Biol. 434, 167351.
22. Ahn-Horst, T.A., Mille, L.S., Sun, G., Morrison, J.H., and Covert, M.W.
(2022). An expanded whole-cell model of E. coli links cellular physiology
with mechanisms of growth rate control. npj Syst. Biol. Appl. 8,3 0.
23. Venter, J.C., Adams, M.D., Myers, E.W., Li, P.W., Mural, R.J., Sutton,
G.G., Smith, H.O., Yandell, M., Evans, C.A., Holt, R.A., et al. (2001).
The sequence of the human genome. Science 291, 1304–1351.
24. Regev, A., Teichmann, S.A., Lander, E.S., Amit, I., Benoist, C., Birney, E.,
Bodenmiller, B., Campbell, P., Carninci, P., Clatworthy, M., et al. (2017).
The human cell atlas. eLife 6, e27041.
25. CZI Single-Cell Biology Program, Abdulla, S., Aevermann, B., Assis, P.,
Badajoz, S., Bell, S.M., Bezzi, E., Batuhan, C., Jim, C., Chambers, S.,
et al. (2023). CZ CELL 3GENE discover: A single- cell data platform for
scalable exploration, analysis and modeling of aggregated data. Preprint
at bioRxiv.
26. Heimberg, G., Kuo, T., DePianto, D., Heigl, T., Nathaniel, D., Salem, O.,
Scalia, G., Biancalani, T., Turley, S., Rock, J., et al. (2023). Scalable
querying of human cell atlases via a foundational model reveals com-
monalities across ﬁbrosis-associated macrophages. Preprint at bioRxiv .
27. Dixit, A., Parnas, O., Li, B., Chen, J., Fulco, C.P., Jerby-Arnon, L., Marja-
novic, N.D., Dionne, D., Burks, T., Raychowdhury, R., et al. (2016). Per-
turb-Seq: dissecting molecular circuits with scalable single-cell RNA
proﬁling of pooled genetic screens. Cell 167, 1853–1866.e17.
28. Srivatsan, S.R., McFaline-Figueroa, J.L., Ramani, V., Saunders, L., Cao,
J., Packer, J., Pliner, H.A., Jackson, D.L., Daza, R.M., Christiansen, L.,
et al. (2020). Massively multiplex chemical transcriptomics at single-
cell resolution. Science 367, 45–51.
29. Feldman, D., Funk, L., Le, A., Carlson, R.J., Leiken, M.D., Tsai, F., Soong,
B., Singh, A., and Blainey, P.C. (2022). Pooled genetic perturbation
screens with image-based phenotypes. Nat. Protoc. 17, 476–512.
30. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez,
A.N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30.
31. Rombach, R., Blattmann, A., Lorenz, D., Esser, P., and Ommer, B. High-
resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
10684–10695.
32. Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, M., Ronneberger,
O., Tunyasuvunakool, K., Bates, R., /C20Zı´dek, A., Potapenko, A., et al.
(2021). Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Na-
ture 596, 583–589.
33. Baek, M., DiMaio, F., Anishchenko, I., Dauparas, J., Ovchinnikov, S., Lee,
G.R., Wang, J., Cong, Q., Kinch, L.N., Schaeffer, R.D., et al. (2021). Ac-
curate prediction of protein structures and interactions using a three-
track neural network. Science 373, 871–876.
34. Lin, Z., Akin, H., Rao, R., Hie, B., Zhu, Z., Lu, W., Smetanin, N., Verkuil, R.,
Kabeli, O., Shmueli, Y., et al. (2023). Evolutionary-scale prediction of
atomic-level protein structure with a language model. Science 379,
1123–1130.
35. Gomes, J., Ramsundar, B., Feinberg, E.N., and Pande, V.S. (2017).
Atomic convolutional networks for predicting protein-ligand binding af-
ﬁnity. Preprint at arXiv .
36. Cunningham, J.M., Koytiger, G., Sorger, P.K., and AlQuraishi, M. (2020).
Biophysical prediction of protein–peptide interactions and signaling net-
works using machine learning. Nat. Methods 17, 175–183.
37. Torng, W., and Altman, R.B. (2019). High precision protein functional site
detection using 3D convolutional neural networks. Bioinformatics 35,
1503–1512.
38. Corso G., Sta¨ rk H., Jing B., Barzilay R., and Jaakkola T. (2023). DiffDock:
Diffusion Steps, Twists, and Turns for Molecular Docking The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations.
39. Kudo, T., Meireles, A.M., Moncada, R., Chen, Y., Wu, P., Gould, J., Hu,
X., Kornfeld, O., Jesudason, R., Foo, C., et al. (2024). Multiplexed, im-
age-based pooled screens in primary cells and tissues with perturbview.
Nat. Biotechnol., 1–10 .
40. Roohani, Y., Huang, K., and Leskovec, J. (2023). Predicting transcrip-
tional outcomes of novel multigene perturbations with GEARS. Nat. Bio-
technol. 42, 927–935.
41. Bunne, C., Stark, S.G., Gut, G., Del Castillo, J.S., Levesque, M., Leh-
mann, K.-V., Pelkmans, L., Krause, A., and Ratsch, G. (2023). Learning
single-cell perturbation responses using neural optimal transport. Nat.
Methods 20, 1759–1768.
42. Lotfollahi, M., Klimovskaia Susmelj, A., De Donno, C., Hetzel, L., Ji, Y.,
Ibarra, I.L., Srivatsan, S.R., Naghipourfar, M., Daza, R.M., Martin, B.,
et al. (2023). Predicting cellular responses to complex perturbations in
high-throughput screens. Mol. Syst. Biol. 19, e11517.
43. Bunne, C., Krause, A., and Cuturi, M. (2022). Supervised Training of Con-
ditional Monge Maps. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 6859–6872.
44. Bereket, M., and Karaletsos, T. (2024). Modelling Cellular Perturbations
with the Sparse Additive Mechanism Shift Variational Autoencoder.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 36.
45. Huang, K., Huang, K., Lopez, R., Hutter, J.-C., Kudo, T., Rios, A., and Re-
gev, A. (2023). Sequential Optimal Experimental De- sign of Perturbation
Screens Guided by Multi-modal Priors. In International Conference on
Research in Computational Molecular Biology (Springer Nature),
pp. 17–37.
46. Roohani, Y.H., Vora, J., Huang, Q., Liang, P., and Leskovec, J. (2024).
BioDiscoveryAgent: An AI Agent for Designing Genetic Perturbation Ex-
periments Preprint at arXiv .
47. Cleary, B., and Regev, A. (2024). The necessity and power of random,
undersampled experiments in biology. Preprint at arXiv .
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7060 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

48. Ji, Y., Zhou, Z., Liu, H., and Davuluri, R.V. (2021). DNABERT: pre-trained
Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers model for
DNA-language in genome. Bioinformatics 37, 2112–2120.
49. Brandes, N., Ofer, D., Peleg, Y., Rappoport, N., and Linial, M. (2022). Pro-
teinBERT: a universal deep-learning model of pro- tein sequence and
function. Bioinformatics 38, 2102–2110.
50. Celaj, A., Gao, A.J., Lau, T.T.Y., Holgersen, E.M., Lo, A., Lodaya, V., Cole,
C.B., Denroche, R.E., Spickett, C., Wagih, O., et al. (2023). An RNA foun-
dation model enables discovery of disease mechanisms and candidate
therapeutics. Preprint at bioRxiv .
51. Nguyen, E., Poli, M., Durrant, M.G., Kang, B., Katrekar, D., Li, D.B., Bar-
tie, L.J., Thomas, A.W., King, S.H., Brixi, G., et al. (2024). Sequence
modeling and design from molecular to genome scale with Evo. Science
386, eado9336.
52. Hayes, T., Rao, R., Akin, H., Sofroniew, N.J., Oktay, D., Lin, Z., Verkuil, R.,
Tran, V.Q., Deaton, J., Wiggert, M., et al. (2024). Simulating 500 million
years of evolution with a language model. Preprint at bioRxiv .
53. Ruffolo, J.A., Nayfach, S., Gallagher, J., Bhatnagar, A., Beazer, J., Hus-
sain, R., Russ, J., Yip, J., Hill, E., Pacesa, M., et al. (2024). Design of highly
functional genome editors by modeling the universe of CRISPR-cas se-
quences. Preprint at bioRxiv .
54. Peng, Z., Schussheim, B., and Chatterjee, P. (2024). PTM-mamba: a
PTM-aware protein language model with bidirectional gated mamba
blocks. Preprint at bioRxiv .
55. Dai, B., Mattox, D.E., and Bailey-Kellogg, C. (2021). Atten- tion please:
modeling global and local context in glycan structure-function relation-
ships. Preprint at bioRxiv .
56. Yu, T., Yao, T., Sun, Z., Shi, F., Zhang, L., Lyu, K., Xuan, B., Liu, A., Zhang,
X., Zou, J., et al. (2024). LipidBERT: A Lipid Language Model Pre- trained
on METiS de novo Lipid Library. Preprint at arXiv .
57. Krishna, R., Wang, J., Ahern, W., Sturmfels, P., Venkatesh, P., Kalvet, I.,
Lee, G.R., Morey-Burrows, F.S., Anishchenko, I., Humphreys, I.R., et al.
(2024). Generalized biomolecular modeling and design with
RoseTTAFold All-Atom. Science 384, eadl2528.
58. Rosen, Y., Brbi /C19c, M., Roohani, Y., Swanson, K., Li, Z., and Leskovec, J.
(2024). Toward universal cell embeddings: integrating single-cell RNA-
seq datasets across species with Saturn. Nat. Methods 21, 1492–1500.
59. Rosen, Y., Roohani, Y., Agrawal, A., Samotor /C20can, L., Tabula Sapiens
Consortium, Quake, S.R., and Leskovec, J. (2023). Universal cell embed-
dings: A foundation model for cell biology. Preprint at bioRxiv .
60. Chen, Y., and Zou, J. (2024). GenePT: A Simple but Effective Foun- da-
tion Model for Genes and Cells Built from ChatGPT. Preprint at bioRxiv .
61. Mahdessian, D., Cesnik, A.J., Gnann, C., Danielsson, F., Stenstro ¨ m, L.,
Arif, M., Zhang, C., Le, T., Johansson, F., Schutten, R., et al. (2021).
Spatiotemporal dissection of the cell cycle with single-cell proteogenom-
ics. Nature 590, 649–654.
62. Chandrasekaran, S.N., Cimini, B.A., Goodale, A., Miller, L., Kost-Ali-
mova, M., Jamali, N., Doench, J.G., Fritchman, B., Skepner, A., Melan-
son, M., et al. (2024). Three million images and mor- phological proﬁles
of cells treated with matched chemical and genetic perturbations. Nat.
Methods 21, 1114–1121.
63. Carlson, R.J., Leiken, M.D., Guna, A., Hacohen, N., and Blainey, P.C.
(2023). A genome-wide optical pooled screen reveals regulators of
cellular antiviral responses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 120,
e2210623120.
64. Thul, P.J., A˚kesson, L., Wiking, M., Mahdessian, D., Geladaki, A., Ait Blal,
H., Alm, T., Asplund, A., Bjo¨ rk, L., Breckels, L.M., et al. (2017). A subcel-
lular map of the human proteome. Science 356, eaal3321.
65. McDole, K., Guignard, L., Amat, F., Berger, A., Malandain, G., Royer,
L.A., Turaga, S.C., Branson, K., and Keller, P.J. (2018). In toto imaging
and reconstruction of post-implantation mouse development at the sin-
gle-cell level. Cell 175, 859–876.e33.
66. Nogales, E., and Mahamid, J. (2024). Bridging structural and cell biology
with cryo-electron microscopy. Nature 628, 47–56.
67. Bauda, E., Gallet, B., Moravcova, J., Effantin, G., Chan, H., Novacek, J.,
Jouneau, P.H., Rodrigues, C.D.A., Schoehn, G., Moriscot, C., et al.
(2024). Ultrastructure of macromolecular assemblies contributing to bac-
terial spore resistance revealed by in situ cryo-electron tomography. Nat.
Commun. 15, 1376.
68. Lelek, M., Gyparaki, M.T., Beliu, G., Schueder, F., Grifﬁe ´ , J., Manley, S.,
Jungmann, R., Sauer, M., Lakadamyali, M., and Zimmer, C. (2021). Sin-
gle-molecule localization microscopy. Nat. Rev. Methods Primers 1,3 9.
69. Mo¨ ckl, L., and Moerner, W.E. (2020). Super-resolution microscopy with
single molecules in biology and beyond–essentials, current trends, and
future challenges. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142, 17828–17844.
70. Cesnik, A., Schaffer, L.V., Gaur, I., Jain, M., Ideker, T., and Lundberg, E.
(2024). Mapping the multiscale proteomic Or- ganization of cellular and
Disease Phenotypes. Annu. Rev. Biomed. Data Sci. 7, 369–389.
71. Qin, Y., Huttlin, E.L., Winsnes, C.F., Gosztyla, M.L., Wacheul, L., Kelly,
M.R., Blue, S.M., Zheng, F., Chen, M., Schaffer, L.V., et al. (2021). A
multi-scale map of cell structure fusing protein images and interactions.
Nature 600, 536–542.
72. Dosovitskiy, A. (2020). An image is worth 16x16 words: transformers for
image recognition at scale. Preprint at arXiv .
73. Fukushima, K. (1980). Neocognitron: a self organizing neural network
model for a mechanism of pattern recognition unaffected by shift in po-
sition. Biol. Cybern. 36, 193–202.
74. LeCun, Y., and Yoshua, B. (1995). Convolutional networks for images,
speech, and time series. The Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Net-
works 3361, 255–258.
75. Bao, Y., Sivanandan, S., and Karaletsos, T. (2023). Channel Vision Trans-
formers: An Image Is Worth c x 16 x 16 WordsThe Twelfth. International
Conference on Learning Representations 4.
76. Kraus, O., Kenyon-Dean, K., Saberian, S., Fallah, M., McLean, P., Leung,
J., Sharma, V., Khan, A., Balakrishnan, J., Celik, S., et al. (2024). Masked
autoencoders for microscopy are scalable learners of cellular biology. In
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pp. 11757–11768.
77. Bao, Y., and Karaletsos, T. (2023). Contextual vision transformers for
robust representation learning. Preprint at arXiv .
78. Lopez, R., Regier, J., Cole, M.B., Jordan, M.I., and Yosef, N. (2018). Deep
generative modeling for single-cell transcriptomics. Nature Methods 15,
1053–1058.
79. Theodoris, C.V., Xiao, L., Chopra, A., Chafﬁn, M.D., Al Sayed, Z.R., Hill,
M.C., Mantineo, H., Brydon, E.M., Zeng, Z., Liu, X.S., et al. (2023). Trans-
fer learning enables predictions in network biology. Nature 618, 616–624.
80. Kobayashi-Kirschvink, K.J., Comiter, C.S., Gaddam, S., Joren, T., Grody,
E.I., Ounadjela, J.R., Zhang, K., Ge, B., Kang, J.W., Xavier, R.J., et al.
(2024). Prediction of single-cell RNA expression proﬁles in live cells by
Raman microscopy with Raman2RNA. Nat. Biotechnol. 42, 1726–1734.
81. Ryu, J., Lopez, R., Bunne, C., and Regev, A. (2024). Cross-modality
matching and prediction of perturbation responses with labeled
Gromov-Wasserstein optimal transport. Preprint at arXiv .
82. Saar, K.L., Scrutton, R.M., Bloznelyte, K., Morgunov, A.S., Good, L.L.,
Lee, A.A., Teichmann, S.A., and Knowles, T.P.J. (2024). Protein Conden-
sate Atlas from predic- tive models of heteromolecular condensate
composition. Nat. Commun. 15
, 5418.
83. Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman,
M., Tirosh, I., Bialas, A., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E., et al. (2015). Highly
parallel genome-wide expression proﬁling of individual cells using nano-
liter droplets. Cell 161, 1202–1214.
84. Sta˚hl, P.L., Salme´ n, F., Vickovic, S., Lundmark, A., Navarro, J.F., Mag-
nusson, J., Giacomello, S., Asp, M., Westholm, J.O., Huss, M., et al.
(2016). Visualization and analysis of gene expression in tissue sections
by spatial transcriptomics. Science 353, 78–82.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7061
Perspective

85. Lundberg, E., and Borner, G.H.H. (2019). Spatial proteomics: a powerful
discovery tool for cell biology. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 20, 285–302.
86. Marconato, L., Palla, G., Yamauchi, K.A., Virshup, I., Heidari, E., Treis, T.,
Vierdag, W.M., Toth, M., Stockhaus, S., Shrestha, R.B., et al. (2024). Spa-
tialData: an open and universal data framework for spatial omics. Nat.
Methods. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-024-02212-x.
87. Somnath, V.R., Pariset, M., Hsieh, Y.-P., Martinez, M.R., Krause, A., and
Bunne, C. (2023). Aligned Diffusion Schro¨ dinger Bridges. In Uncertainty
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 1985–1995 .
88. Katharopoulos, A., Vyas, A., Pappas, N., and Fleuret, F. (2020). Fast au-
toregressive transformers with linear attention. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning .
89. Abramson, J., Adler, J., Dunger, J., Evans, R., Green, T., Pritzel, A., Ron-
neberger, O., Willmore, L., Ballard, A.J., Bambrick, J., et al. (2024). Accu-
rate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3.
Nature 630, 493–500.
90. Norman, T.M., Horlbeck, M.A., Replogle, J.M., Ge, A.Y., Xu, A., Jost, M.,
Gilbert, L.A., and Weissman, J.S. (2019). Exploring genetic interaction
manifolds constructed from rich single-cell phenotypes. Science 365,
786–793.
91. Lawson, M.J., Camsund, D., Larsson, J., Baltekin, O¨ ., Fange, D., and Elf,
J. (2017). In situ genotyping of a pooled strain library after characterizing
complex phenotypes. Mol. Syst. Biol. 13, 947.
92. Papamarkou, T., Skoularidou, M., Palla, K., Aitchison, L., Arbel, J., Dun-
son, D., Filliponne, M., Fortuin, V., Hennig, P., Hernandez-Lobato, J.M.,
et al. (2024). Position: bayesian deep learning is needed in the age of
large-scale AI. In Forty-First International Conference on Machine
Learning.
93. D’Angelo, F., and Fortuin, V. (2021). Wenzel F.On Stein Variational Neural
Network. Ensembles Preprint at arXiv .
94. Ober, S.W., Rasmussen, C.E., and van der Wilk, M. (2021). The promises
and pitfalls of deep kernel learning. In Conference on Uncertainty in Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 1206–1216 .
95. Karaletsos, T. (2020). Bui T.D.Hierarchical Gaussian Process Priors for
Bayesian Neural Network Weights. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33,
17141–17152.
96. Kapoor, S., Maddox, W.J., Izmailov, P., and Wilson, A.G. (2022). On un-
certainty, tempering, and data augmentation in bayesian classiﬁcation.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 35, 18211–18225.
97. Lakshminarayanan, B., Pritzel, A., and Blundell, C. (2017). Simple and
Scalable Predictive Uncertainty Estimation using Deep Ensembles.
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30.
98. Angelopoulos, A.N., and Bates, S. (2021). A gentle introduction to
conformal prediction and distribution-free uncertainty quantiﬁcation.
Preprint at arXiv .
99. Cherian, J.J., Gibbs, I., and Cande ` s, E.J. (2024). Large language model
validity via enhanced conformal prediction methods. Preprint at arXiv .
100. Cho, N.H., Cheveralls, K.C., Brunner, A.D., Kim, K., Michaelis, A.C., Ra-
ghavan, P., Kobayashi, H., Savy, L., Li, J.Y., Canaj, H., et al. (2022). Open-
Cell: endogenous tagging for the cartography of human cellular organiza-
tion. Science 375, eabi6983.
101. Uhle´ n, M., Fagerberg, L., Hallstro ¨ m, B.M., Lindskog, C., Oksvold, P.,
Mardinoglu, A., Sivertsson, A ˚., Kampf, C., Sjo ¨ stedt, E., Asplund, A.,
et al.. (2015). Proteomics. Tissue-based map of the human proteome.
Science 347
, 1260419.
102. Berger, C., Premaraj, N., Ravelli, R.B.G., Knoops, K., Lo´ pez-Iglesias, C.,
and Peters, P.J. (2023). Cryo-electron tomography on focused ion beam
lamellae transforms structural cell biology. Nat. Methods 20, 499–511.
103. Loconte, V., Chen, J.H., Vanslembrouck, B., Ekman, A.A., McDermott,
G., Le Gros, M.A., and Larabell, C.A. (2023). Soft X-ray tomograms pro-
vide a structural basis for whole-cell modeling. FASEB J. 37, e22681.
104. Mofﬁtt, J.R., Lundberg, E., and Heyn, H. (2022). The emerging landscape
of spatial proﬁling technologies. Nat. Rev. Genet. 23, 741–759.
105. Vandereyken, K., Sifrim, A., Thienpont, B., and Voet, T. (2023). Methods
and applications for single-cell and spatial multi-omics. Nat. Rev. Genet.
24, 494–515.
106. Tabula Sapiens Consortium*, Jones, R.C., Karkanias, J., Krasnow, M.A.,
Pisco, A.O., Quake, S.R., Salzman, J., Yosef, N., Bulthaup, B., Brown, P.,
et al. (2022). The tabula sapiens: A multiple-organ, single-cell transcrip-
tomic atlas of humans. Science 376, eabl4896.
107. He, B., Bergenstra˚hle, L., Stenbeck, L., Abid, A., Andersson, A., Borg, A˚.,
Maaskola, J., Lundeberg, J., and Zou, J. (2020). Integrating spatial gene
expression and breast tumour morphology via deep learning. Nat. Bio-
med. Eng. 4, 827–834.
108. Bock, C., Boutros, M., Camp, J.G., Clarke, L., Clevers, H., Knoblich, J.A.,
Liberali, P., Regev, A., Rios, A.C., Stegle, O., et al. (2021). The organoid
cell atlas. Nat. Biotechnol. 39, 13–17.
109. Tabula; Muris Consortium; Overall coordination; Logistical coordination;
Organ collection and processing; Library preparation and sequencing;
Computational data analysis; Cell type annotation; Writing group; Sup-
plemental text writing group; Principal investigators (2018). Single-cell
transcriptomics of 20 mouse organs creates a tabula muris. Nature
562, 367–372.
110. Li, H., Janssens, J., De Waegeneer, M., Kolluru, S.S., Davie, K., Gardeux,
V., Saelens, W., David, F.P.A., Brbi/C19c, M., Spanier, K., et al. (2022). Fly Cell
Atlas: A single-nucleus transcriptomic atlas of the adult fruit ﬂy. Science
375, eabk2432.
111. Lange, M., Granados, A., Vijaykumar, S., Bragantini, J., Ancheta, S., San-
thosh, S., Borja, M., Kobayashi, H., McGeever, E., Solak, A.C., et al.
(2023). Zebrahub – Multimodal zebraﬁsh Developmental Atlas Reveals
the State Transition Dynamics of Late Vertebrate Pluripotent Axial Pro-
genitors. Preprint at bioRxiv .
112. Katz, K., Shutov, O., Lapoint, R., Kimelman, M., Brister, J.R., and O’Sul-
livan, C. (2022). The Sequence Read Archive: a decade more of explosive
growth. Nucleic Acids Res. 50, D387–D390.
113. Achiam, J., et al. (2023). GPT-4 technical report. Preprint at arXiv .
114. Ding, F., and Steinhardt, J.N. (2024). Protein language models are biased
by unequal sequence sampling across the tree of life. Preprint at bioRxiv .
115. Liao, W.-W., Asri, M., Ebler, J., Doerr, D., Haukness, M., Hickey, G., Lu,
S., Lucas, J.K., Monlong, J., Abel, H.J., et al. (2023). A draft human pan-
genome reference. Nature 617, 312–324.
116. Liu, J., Shen, Z., He, Y., Zhang, X., Xu, R., Yu, H., and Cui, P. (2021). To-
wards out-of-distribution generalization: A survey. Preprint at arXiv .
117. Nisonoff, H., Wang, Y., and Listgarten, J. (2023). Coherent blend- ing of
biophysics-based knowledge with bayesian neural networks for robust
protein property prediction. ACS Synth. Biol. 12, 3242–3251. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.3c00217.
118. Zheng, F., Kelly, M.R., Ramms, D.J., Heintschel, M.L., Tao, K., Tutuncuo-
glu, B., Lee, J.J., Ono, K., Foussard, H., Chen, M., et al. (2021). Interpre-
tation of cancer mutations using a multiscale map of protein systems.
Science 374
, eabf3067.
119. Ma, J., Yu, M.K., Fong, S., Ono, K., Sage, E., Demchak, B., Sharan, R.,
and Ideker, T. (2018). Using deep learning to model the hierarchical struc-
ture and function of a cell. Nat. Methods 15, 290–298.
120. Gao, S., Fang, A., Huang, Y., Giunchiglia, V., Noori, A., Schwarz, J.R., Ek-
tefaie, Y., Kondic, J., and Zitnik, M. (2024). Empowering biomedical dis-
covery with AI agents. Cell 187, 6125–6151.
121. Hurrell, T., Naidoo, J., Ntlhafu, T., and Scholeﬁeld, J. (2024). An African
perspective on genetically diverse human induced pluripotent stem cell
lines. Nat. Commun. 15, 8581.
122. Gibbs, R.A., Belmont, J.W., Hardenbol, P., Willis, T.D., Yu, F.L., Yang,
H.M., Ch’ang, L.Y., Huang, W., Shen, B., Tam, Y., et al. (2003). The inter-
national HapMap project. Nature 5, 467–475.
123. Cancer; Genome; Atlas; Research Network, Weinstein, J.N., Collisson,
E.A., Mills, G.B., Shaw, K.R.M., Ozenberger, B.A., Ellrott, K., Shmulevich,
ll
OPEN ACCESS
7062 Cell 187, December 12, 2024
Perspective

I., Sander, C., and Stuart, J.M. (2013). The cancer genome atlas pan-can-
cer analysis project. Nat. Genet. 45, 1113–1120.
124. ENCODE Project Consortium (2012). An integrated encyclopedia of DNA
elements in the human genome. Nature 489, 57–74.
125. Lonsdale, J., Thomas, J., Salvatore, M., Phillips, R., Lo, E., Shad, S.,
Hasz, R., Walters, G., Garcia, F., Young, N., and Foster, B. (2013). The
Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project. Nat. Genet. 45, 580–585.
126. Ponte´ n, F., Jirstro¨ m, K., and Uhlen, M. (2008). The Human Protein Atlas–a
tool for pathology. J. Pathol. 216, 387–393.
127. Downey, P., and Peakman, T.C. (2008). Design and implementation of a
high-throughput biological sample processing facil- ity using modern
manufacturing principles. Int. J. Epidemiol. 37 (Suppl 1 ), i46–i50.
128. Madani, A., Krause, B., Greene, E.R., Subramanian, S., Mohr, B.P., Hol-
ton, J.M., Olmos, J.L., Xiong, C., Sun, Z.Z., Socher, R., et al. (2023). Large
language models generate func- tional protein sequences across diverse
families. Nat. Biotechnol. 41, 1099–1106.
129. Nelson, M.R., Tipney, H., Painter, J.L., Shen, J., Nicoletti, P., Shen, Y.,
Floratos, A., Sham, P.C., Li, M.J., Wang, J., et al. (2015). The support
of human genetic evidence for approved drug indications. Nat. Genet.
47, 856–860.
130. Mason, C., Brindley, D.A., Culme-Seymour, E.J., and Davie, N.L. (2011).
Cell therapy industry: billion dollar global business with unlimited poten-
tial. Regen. Med. 6, 265–272.
131. Bashor, C.J., Hilton, I.B., Bandukwala, H., Smith, D.M., and Veiseh, O.
(2022). Engineering the next generation of cell-based therapeutics. Nat.
Rev. Drug Discov. 21, 655–675.
132. Jia, Q., Wang, A., Yuan, Y., Zhu, B., and Long, H. (2022). Heterogeneity of
the tumor immune microenvironment and its clinical relevance. Exp.
Hematol. Oncol. 11,2 4.
133. Melssen, M.M., Sheybani, N.D., Leick, K.M., and Slingluff, C.L. (2023).
Barriers to immune cell inﬁltration in tumors. J. Immunother. Cancer 11.
134. Chow, A., Perica, K., Klebanoff, C.A., and Wolchok, J.D. (2022). Clinical
implications of T cell exhaustion for cancer immunotherapy. Nature Re-
views Clinical Oncology 19, 775–790.
135. de Visser, K.E., and Joyce, J.A. (2023). The evolving tumor microenviron-
ment: from cancer initiation to metastatic outgrowth. Cancer Cell 41,
374–403.
136. Barkley, D., Moncada, R., Pour, M., Liberman, D.A., Dryg, I., Werba, G.,
Wang, W., Baron, M., Rao, A., Xia, B., et al. (2022). Cancer cell states
recur across tumor types and form speciﬁc interactions with the tumor
microenvironment. Nat. Genet. 54, 1192–1201.
137. Schwartzberg, L., Kim, E.S., Liu, D., and Schrag, D. (2017). Precision
oncology: who, how, what, when, and when not? American Society of
Clinical Oncology Educational Book 37, 160–169.
138. Aebersold, R., Agar, J.N., Amster, I.J., Baker, M.S., Bertozzi, C.R., Boja,
E.S., Costello, C.E., Cravatt, B.F., Fenselau, C., Garcia, B.A., et al. (2018).
How many human proteoforms are there? Nat. Chem. Biol. 14, 206–214.
139.
Katsoulakis, E., Wang, Q., Wu, H., Shahriyari, L., Fletcher, R., Liu, J.,
Achenie, L., Liu, H., Jackson, P., Xiao, Y., et al. (2024). Digital twins for
health: a scoping review. npj Digit. Med. 7,7 7.
140. Rajewsky, N., Almouzni, G., Gorski, S.A., Aerts, S., Amit, I., Bertero,
M.G., Bock, C., Bredenoord, A.L., Cavalli, G., Chiocca, S., et al. (2020).
Lifetime and improving European healthcare through cell-based inter-
ceptive medicine. Nature 587, 377–386.
141. Alix-Panabie` res, C., and Pantel, K. (2021). Liquid biopsy: from discovery
to clinical application. Cancer Discov. 11, 858–873.
142. Vaishnav, E.D., de Boer, C.G., Molinet, J., Yassour, M., Fan, L., Adiconis,
X., Thompson, D.A., Levin, J.Z., Cubillos, F.A., and Regev, A. (2022). The
evolution, evolvability and engineering of gene regulatory DNA. Nature
603, 455–463.
143. Go´ mez-de-Mariscal, E., Garcı´a-Lo´ pez-de-Haro, C., Ouyang, W., Donati,
L., Lundberg, E., Unser, M., Mun ˜oz-Barrutia, A., and Sage, D. (2021).
DeepImageJ: A user-friendly environment to run deep learning models
in ImageJ. Nat. Methods 18, 1192–1195.
144. Le, T., Winsnes, C.F., Axelsson, U., Xu, H., Mohanakrishnan Kaimal, J.,
Mahdessian, D., Dai, S., Makarov, I.S., Ostankovich, V., Xu, Y., et al.
(2022). Analysis of the human protein atlas weakly supervised single-
cell classiﬁcation competition. Nat. Methods 19, 1221–1229.
145. Chen, R.J., Ding, T., Lu, M.Y., Williamson, D.F.K., Jaume, G., Song, A.H.,
Chen, B., Zhang, A., Shao, D., Shaban, M., et al. (2024). Towards a gen-
eral-purpose foundation model for computational pathology. Nat. Med.
30, 850–862.
146. Moen, E., Bannon, D., Kudo, T., Graf, W., Covert, M., and Van Valen, D.
(2019). Deep learning for cellular image analysis. Nat. Methods 16,
1233–1246.
147. Avsec, /C20Z., Weilert, M., Shrikumar, A., Krueger, S., Alexandari, A., Dalal,
K., Fropf, R., McAnany, C., Gagneur, J., Kundaje, A., et al. (2021).
Base-resolution models of transcription-factor binding reveal soft motif
syntax. Nat. Genet. 53, 354–366.
148. Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. (2020). Denoising diffusion proba- bilistic
models. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 33, 6840–6851.
149. Lipman, Y., Chen, R.T., Ben-Hamu, H., Nickel, M., and Le, M. (2023).
Flow Matching for Generative Modeling. International Conference on
Learning Representations .
150. Scarselli, F., Gori, M., Tsoi, A.C., Hagenbuchner, M., and Monfardini, G.
(2009). The graph neural network model. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. 20,
61–80.
151. Cao, Y., and Shen, Y. (2020). Energy-based graph convolutional net-
works for scoring protein docking models. Proteins 88, 1091–1099.
152. Brbi/C19c, M., Cao, K., Hickey, J.W., Tan, Y., Snyder, M.P., Nolan, G.P., and
Leskovec, J. (2022). Annotation of spatially resolved single-cell data with
STELLAR. Nat. Methods 19, 1411–1418.
153. Wu, Z., Trevino, A.E., Wu, E., Swanson, K., Kim, H.J., D’Angio, H.B., Pre-
ska, R., Charville, G.W., Dalerba, P.D., Egloff, A.M., et al. (2022). Graph
deep learning for the characterization of tumour microenvironments
from spatial protein proﬁles in tissue specimens. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 6,
1435–1448.
154. Hamilton, W., Ying, Z., and Leskovec, J. (2017). Inductive Representation
Learning on Large Graphs. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 30.
ll
OPEN ACCESS
Cell 187, December 12, 2024 7063
Perspective